Okay, so this is the session on using
advanced web technologies on iPhone,
and my name is Vicki Murley.
I'm the Safari Technologies Evangelist
at Apple.
Okay, so when the SDK was released-- that
was obviously a big deal to a lot
of native-application developers.
But at the same time,
a lot of features specific to web
applications were released as well.
And that is great for you guys,
because you're able, now,
to develop some really rich and
interesting iPhone web applications.
At the same time, you get to leverage
your existing skillset,
you don't have to go learn
Objective-C or anything like that to
create a great experience on iPhone.
Many of the features and technologies
that we're gonna talk about today
are based on open web standards.
So even if a feature is only implemented
in Safari on iPhone right now,
it's very likely that it will
be implemented in other browsers
in the future by virtue of
being part of a standard.
And so you're going to be kind of
ahead of the curve by adopting early.
And also with web technologies
and web applications,
you have instant deployment.
So if you need to make a change to your
app or want to put out a new version,
that can happen instantly.
No third party to go through.
Okay.
So let's do a quick comparison
of native applications versus web
applications in four main categories.
So the first one to think about
is kind of feeling built-in.
And when I think about feeling
built-in for native applications,
I think about things like launching
an app via a home screen icon.
Of course,
native apps run in full-screen mode.
They don't run within
another application.
You don't have to type in a
URL to get to a native app.
And native apps can detect
orientation changes as well,
so you can do different things
in your UI based on that change.
Well, all of those features are available
in web applications as well.
If I wanted to implement
something to do with multi-touch
in my native application,
like detect a rotation or
implement a custom gesture,
I would use a class in
iPhone SDK called UI touch.
Well, for iPhone web applications,
you can do the same sort of thing
through JavaScript using this
technology that we call DOM touch.
So that's also possible
in web applications.
Advanced graphics.
If I were looking to integrate
some really cool graphics
into my UI on iPhone,
I might use something like Core Graphics
or Core Animation or OpenGL ES.
Well, in web applications now,
we have a technology - we call this
family of effects CSS visual effects,
and this includes CSS transforms,
transitions, and animations,
and these are really hardware
accelerated animations and graphics
that you design through CSS.
And lastly, local storage.
In native applications,
you can store data in an SQLite
database or write files to disk.
Well, in web applications,
you can't write files to disk on the fly.
You can store files locally.
We're gonna talk about that later on.
But you can also store data on the
fly in an SQLite database locally for
offline access or whatever you like.
So we're gonna talk about those
four key areas that we just
looked at on the graph there.
Feeling built in,
making your web app feel integrated,
feel like a built-in app on the system.
Touch and gesture events,
multi-touch through JavaScript,
basically.
CSS visual effects,
which includes those hardware accelerated
animations that I talked about.
And also, storing data locally.
We're gonna talk about storing data
on the fly in an SQLite database,
and also how to create a locally
cached version of your application,
where you can cache all the
resource files for your app.
Okay,
so getting started with feeling built-in.
There are three things
we're going to cover here:
home screen icons,
running your web application
in full-screen mode,
and how to detect orientation changes
from within a web application.
So here's a picture of an iPhone.
I'm sure that you're all familiar
with what an iPhone looks like.
And when I want to launch an application,
as I mentioned earlier,
I just touch one of these
icons on the home screen.
I don't have to launch another app and
then type in a URL or retrieve a URL from
my bookmarks or something like that.
I just touch an icon on the home screen.
And we want you guys to have that same
functionality for web applications.
So we've added a way-- or a way
has been-- existed for a while now,
that you can have an application icon
for your site-- or for your web app.
Excuse me.
So the way to do this is to just
create an image and give it this name--
"AppleTouchIcon.png." And you store this
in the root directory of your web server,
and then when a user surfs over to your
site and they click on the "+" button
at the bottom of the Safari screen,
they'll see this panel slide up,
and this button "Add to Home Screen."
And if they touch this button,
then the image that you've created
then pops up on the home screen,
and they can launch your app from this
home screen icon from that point forward.
So using this named image is one
way to have a home screen icon,
and that's using a single image for
all of the pages of your web app.
If you wanted to have different icons
for different pages of your web app,
you could do that by adding a link
tag to those pages specifically.
And the relationship
here is AppleTouchIcon,
and I'm linking to an image here.
In this case,
the name of the image doesn't matter.
In the first example,
it had to be named AppleTouchIcon,
but with the link tag you can
name it whatever you like.
So there are some guidelines
for creating a home screen
icon that we advise people on.
The first is that your image
should be 57 pixels square.
We add the rounded corners later on,
so a hard 90-degree angle on the corners
is the best way to start so that that
rounding effect is what you want.
We recommend no shine or gloss on this
image because we actually add a shine
to the top of the image on the fly,
just like we add the rounded corners.
And sometimes,
if you add shading to your own icon,
that can kind of conflict
with the shading that we add,
and it looks kind of odd.
So it's often best to
have just a flat image.
So going from the image that
I just had on screen with the
hard edges and totally flat,
in Safari on iPhone,
that image gets transformed
to what you see here.
This icon that has rounded corners and
a shine across the top of the icon.
So if you do want to have custom
shading on your icon and you don't
want to have the shading that we add,
there's a way to do that, too.
And instead of naming your icon
"AppleTouchIcon.png," you would name
it "AppleTouchIcon-Precompose.png."
And that's a signal to Safari on
iPhone and to the home screen to
not add any shading to your icon.
You'll still get the rounded corners,
but no shading.
So if I were to name my icon
"appletouchicon-precompose.png," I would
go from an effect that looks like this,
what we see here, to this, just,
you know, totally flat,
no shading on top,
but still having the rounded corners.
Okay, so now you have a home screen icon.
Here it is, it's looking pretty great.
And your user touches it
to launch your application,
and now,
it's obvious to them again that they
are running a web application because
you can see the Safari Chrome at
the top and bottom of the screen,
the URL field and then the Back/Forward
buttons and Bookmark buttons,
et cetera, at the bottom.
So, you know, step one,
we're looking good.
But step two here,
the user is queued that you're
running in a web browser.
And that kind of takes
away from the built-in,
native look and feel of your app.
So luckily, in iPhone OS 2.1,
which is the release prior to
the release that just came out,
there's a way to hide
the Safari UI components.
So we call this "full screen
mode," and the Safari UI is
hidden when your application is
launched from its home screen icon.
So you can imagine,
if you enabled this feature and a user
were just surfing around in Safari on
iPhone and they went to your site,
and all of the UI elements disappeared,
like no URL field anymore,
no Back/Forward buttons,
that would be pretty jarring,
and users would also be wondering, "Well,
how do I get to another site
from here "or go backwards or go
forward?" So the UI components
are only hidden when your app is
launched from its home screen icon.
So this feature is easy to enable.
It's just a meta tag.
Meta name equals "Apple mobile web
app capable." Content equals "Yes."
The appearance of the status
bar when you're in full-screen
mode is customizable.
So the status bar is just that small
bar at the top of every screen that
you see that has battery strength,
Wi-Fi signal strength, time, et cetera.
That's the status bar.
So, just like in native applications,
you can customize the way
that status bar looks.
So gray is the default,
and other options are black,
and black translucent.
An example of black translucent
is in the Photos app on iPhone.
So you scroll the photos,
and you can see them scrolling
by underneath the status bar.
So that's an example
of black translucent.
One important thing to know-- if
you use one of the opaque options,
gray or black,
your content is going to be shifted
down by 30 pixels and rendered as such.
But if you use black translucent,
you're gonna get-- I'm sorry,
it's 20 pixels, actually.
You're gonna get that extra 20
pixels of vertical screen space
because your content will be
displayed behind the status bar.
So this customization is easy to enable.
It's just another meta tag.
Meta name equals Apple mobile
web app status bar style,
and here I've set the color to black.
The last useful piece of information
about full-screen mode is that
you can actually query this mode.
So, we were talking in an earlier session
in the Q&A about maybe you want to
lay out your UI differently if the
user is running in full-screen mode,
or maybe you want to add
a note on your-- you know,
on the front page of your web
app to cue users to launch
from the home screen icon,
et cetera.
You can query this property,
just with the line of JavaScript,
"window.navigator.standalone,"
looking at the standalone property.
So this feature is really easy to adopt.
And lots of people have picked it up.
Here's one example of a cool
full-screen web app that I used
a lot a couple months ago.
Now, this slide is a little out of date,
I admit.
But this was just an app that
showed me some poll data.
And then,
when I would click the "i" button
in the lower right-hand corner,
a panel slid in to show me where
the poll data-- about where
the poll data was coming from.
So this is a pretty simple
full-screen application,
but if you have a large, you know,
complicated, multiple pages,
many screens kind of web app,
there are a couple tips that
you need to keep in mind if
you're using this feature.
The first is that any external
links are going to open in Safari.
So basically,
this means that you need to use AJAX to
keep your application to a single page.
Some great examples of how to do that
are built into the Dashcode templates.
So there's a template that has
a browser view where you have
sliding panels of different menus.
And there's another one that has a flip
transition to settings on the back.
These are great examples of how to
have a web application that's one page,
updated with AJAX,
and a great approach to
using full-screen mode.
The debugger in Dashcode is a great
way to kind of take a look at the code,
how the template is
achieving a certain effect,
and replicate the same piece of
functionality in your web app.
So that covers full-screen mode,
all that you need to know.
Now we're going to talk about
detecting orientation changes
from within iPhone web apps.
So this is just an event on the body.
So here I'm listening for
the orientation change,
and when I receive that event,
I'm going to call this function that
I've defined "update_orientation."
In my updateorientation function,
I'm just going to look at the
orientation property on the window.
And if the case is zero,
I'm in portrait mode.
I haven't turned the phone at all.
If the case is -90,
I have turned the phone clockwise,
and I'm in landscape-right mode.
And if the orientation value is 90,
I've turned the phone counterclockwise,
and the phone is in
landscape-left orientation.
So that covers, you know,
three main points for
kind of feeling built-in:
home screen icon, full-screen mode,
and detecting orientation changes.
For the next three sections,
we're going to, you know,
get into the nuts and bolts of how to
make the contents of that application
really just super optimized for iPhone,
how to take advantage of
all of our new features.
So getting started with
touch and gesture events.
So when we first introduced this feature
around the time that iPhone SDK came out,
we got some questions from
the developer community.
You know, "Why can't I just use
Mouse Events "to do kind of rotation,
scale, et cetera?
"I click on-- I touch an element,
that's an on-click, right?" Well,
this all really boils down to the
fact that a mouse is not equivalent
to this disembodied hand that you see
on the right-hand side of the screen,
and that, you know, a mouse,
you have continuous input.
On the screen, so, you know,
you move your cursor across a web page,
on-mouse over events fire,
CSS colon hover styles are applied as you
move that cursor around the home screen.
If you put your finger
down on a touch screen,
you know, you might receive an
on-click mouse event,
but then, as you move your finger around,
you're really just dragging the
screen or panning the screen.
The paradigm is totally
different on iPhone,
so we needed to create something new.
Another great reason why mouse
events aren't really appropriate
for this sort of thing is that
Safari on iPhone is really the first
browser to render desktop-quality
web content on a mobile device.
And so we need to remain
compatible with all of that
existing web content out there.
And mouse events need to fire as
expected for those existing sites.
But we want to be able to give you
guys the opportunity to provide
the same kind of rich experience
that you see in native applications
in your iPhone web applications.
All right, so enough overview.
Let's talk about what happens
when I put a finger down on the
screen in terms of touch events.
So when the first finger
touches the screen,
a touch start event is sent.
When that finger moves,
touch move events are sent.
When that finger is
lifted from the screen,
a touch-end event is sent, and of course,
if I don't move my finger in between,
I just get a touch-start event
followed by a touch-end event.
If a user clicks the home
screen button while a sequence
of touch events is happening,
then a touch cancel event is sent.
So you can handle that case gracefully
if a user clicks the home screen button.
So you can listen for these events just
like you would any other mouse event,
either via directly on the element
- here I'm listening for touch start
on this div - or you can add them
to elements via add event listener.
So here, I'm listening for a touch start,
and when that event fires,
I'm going to call this function
that I've defined "track touches."
Okay, so I've received an event.
Now what can I do with it?
Well,
the first thing you want to do is prevent
the default behavior for that event.
So I mentioned earlier, you know,
you put your finger down on the
screen and you drag it around while
you start panning the content.
If you want to work with
touch events directly,
you want to disable that panning
behavior or scrolling behavior
or whatever's happening.
So you want to prevent the
default behavior for that event,
first thing.
After that,
the important thing to know is
that a touch event maintains
three lists of touch objects.
So the first is all touches on the page,
event.touches.
The second is all
touches for this target,
event.target_touches.
And the third is any new
touches for this event,
event.change_touches.
So you have these three
lists of touch objects,
and within each of those lists,
each object has certain properties.
So the basics of properties
of touch objects are the
target node of this touch,
which is the target,
and the identifier property,
which is the unique ID for the object.
Just like mouse events,
there are also many different coordinates
that you can look at for that touch.
So we have client X and client Y.
Those are coordinates that
are relative to the viewport.
Screen X,
screen Y are relative to the screen.
And page X,
page Y are relative to the entire page.
So the important thing to
remember with these properties is
that when you receive an event,
remember that you are receiving
a list of touch objects,
so you have to index into
that list before you can look
at any of these properties.
So here I'm looking at the first
touch in my target touches array.
I'm looking at the page
X value for that touch.
So you may be thinking, "Well,
touch events sound really cool,
"but if I want to do
something complicated,
"like detect whether a user has zoomed
in or rotated "or something like that,
that's gonna be a lot to
track "in those arrays,
and that could get complicated." Well,
luckily, there's kind of a high-level
way to look at touch events,
and these are gesture events.
These are kind of multi-touch
through JavaScript.
So if we go through this
same exercise again,
if I put one finger down on the screen,
a touch start event is sent.
But once I have two fingers down,
gesture start events are sent,
in addition to the touch events
that we've already covered.
Just because gesture events are
being sent doesn't mean that
touch events stop being sent.
So now I have two fingers on the screen,
and as I move those fingers,
gesture change events are sent.
And if I lift those two
fingers off the screen,
a gesture end event is sent.
Of course, if I don't move my two
fingers in between,
I just go directly from
gesture start to gesture end,
and if I lift fingers
off the-- or I'm sorry,
if the user clicks the home screen button
in the middle of a gesture sequence,
then a touch cancel event is sent.
And just like touch elements
or any mouse events,
for that matter,
you can listen for these events
directly on the element or add them
to elements via add event listener.
So just like touch events,
gestures also have properties.
The most basic is the
target node for the gesture.
But then there are some
properties that are sort of
what makes a gesture a gesture.
And when I think about gestures,
I think about things like
scaling and rotation.
So those are two of the kind of
definitive properties on a gesture.
So the first one that we'll
talk about here is scale.
And scale is defined as the
distance between two fingers
since the start of an event as a
multiplier of the initial distance.
So that's kind of a mouthful,
a lot to remember.
A good rule of thumb to keep in mind is
that if the scale value is less than one,
the user has pinch closed to zoom out,
and if the scale value is more than one,
the user has pinched open to zoom in.
The second definitive property
of gestures is rotation.
Rotation is defined as the delta rotation
since the start of an event in degrees.
Again,
a good rule of thumb to keep in mind
is if the rotation value is positive,
a user has rotated in
the clockwise direction,
and if the rotation value is negative,
they have turned in the
counterclockwise direction.
Okay, so that is a quick overview
of touch and gesture events.
How to implement custom gesture
detection or touch detection
in your web applications.
Now let's move on to this
family of technologies that
we call CSS visual effects.
So on iPhone OS and also on Mac OS X,
for that matter,
you are used to seeing these
kind of innovative pieces of UI.
So one example here is
the Weather application.
To see the settings,
you get this kind of 3D
flip to the other side.
In Cover Flow mode in
the iPod application,
you have like a 3D view of your
albums here that you can look
through all your album covers.
And also there's another kind of
animation that's directly in the UI,
and they're a little more subtle,
but this type of animation is
really providing kind of a cue to
the user as to what's going on.
So I want to move this
message to another folder.
It doesn't just, you know, disappear.
There's this little animation,
this little jump down from, you know,
the source spot to the destination spot.
And now I know exactly what
has happened to that message,
where it ended up.
Another good example-- on Mac OS X is
minimizing a window to the dock,
you know?
It doesn't just disappear and
then reappear down in the dock.
There's an animation that is
either the scale or the Genie
effect that tells the user,
"Here was the window.
"Here's where it's going.
"Here's where you can find
it later on." So this kind of
subtle animation is really,
you know,
one of the ways that people are able
to learn to use operating systems
like Mac OS X and iPhone OS so easily,
because they're being cued,
as to what is actually going on.
So now, there's a great way to add these
kinds of animations and unique kind of
positioning to your web applications.
And that's this family of technologies
that we call "CSS visual effects."
So there's three aspects that
we're going to talk about today.
They are transforms,
which are-- which is all about
positioning content in unique ways.
Transitions, which are simple animations,
sort of a-- you might think of
it as a two-keyframe animation,
where you specify the first
frame and the last frame,
and WebKit takes care of rendering
all the frames in between.
And then, we have keyframe animations,
where you have explicit control over
the keyframes within an animation,
not, you know, WebKit taking care of
everything in between.
Okay.
Oh, so this is a technology that was
pioneered by the engineers at Apple,
and we have since submitted this
as part of inclusion to CSS3,
and we're getting some adoption,
so that's great.
If you want to see the specs that
we have written and submitted,
those are available at
webkit.org/specs/cssvisualeffects.
So going back to my mail example here,
if I-- you know, this is a native app,
but if I wanted to do
this in a web application,
I might, you know,
divide up this cell like so.
You know, the name is one cell,
and the subtitle is another cell,
and that envelope is a cell,
and maybe I was really
lazy in my image editor,
and I just made this envelope,
and I had a background color on it.
So then, when I go to "Animated," it
looks really ugly because you
can see this background on it.
Well, a great way to position elements
like that is to use CSS transforms.
So this is a way to translate, rotate,
scale, or skew any HTML element.
So if we look at this
envelope example again,
if I want to, you know,
turn this a little bit,
I can do that in just one line of CSS,
and that is "-webkit transform
rotate by 20 degrees." So one
thing I want to mention,
this "-webkit" prefix here,
that's a common convention that
all web browsers follow for
CSS properties that are not yet
part of a final specification.
So in Mozilla-based browsers,
you would see "-moz" at the beginning.
So it doesn't mean that this
is non-standard and will
never be part of a standard.
It just means it's kind of
pre-standard at the moment.
So anyway,
I've rotated my envelope by 20 degrees,
and I want to mention here that you can
also chain together these transforms.
So I rotated by 20 degrees,
now I've also scaled up by 25%, and
I've translated in the Y direction
by 30%. And that 30% is calculated
off of the size of the element,
so it's 30% of the element size.
Here I've translated in the Y direction,
but you can really perform any
of the transform operations
in a single direction.
So you can scale only in the
X direction or only in the Y direction,
or translate only in the X direction,
etc.
A piece of additional control that's
available with CSS transforms is
controlling the transform origin.
So I have this example here.
It's a, you know,
I have this sale banner on my website,
and I want to rotate it, you know,
by -20 degrees.
So when I do that,
there's actually an origin in the
center of the element by default,
and your element is
rotated around that origin.
So in this case, my banner is kind of,
you know, going off the page here.
So I could choose to find some
additional CSS to kind of slide
that banner down a little bit,
use some CSS positioning so that
it's not going off the page,
but then I've altered my site,
and it might not degrade
gracefully in other browsers.
A better approach is to use
WebKit Transform Origin.
You know,
what I really want is to be able to set
the origin in that upper left corner,
and then have my rotation applied.
So I can do that with
WebKit Transform Origin here
I've specified "top left,"
then my rotation is applied,
and my banner is no longer
going off the screen.
The added bonus here is that any
browser that doesn't understand
CSS transforms will just ignore
both of these properties,
and you'll just have the
straight banner across the page,
but then you haven't modified
your existing CSS in a way that
your site would not degrade
gracefully in other browsers.
WebKit Transform Origin has the
same syntax as background position,
meaning that you specify just
a pair of keywords from top
left bottom center right.
If you don't specify the second keyword,
then center is the default.
So if I just said "webkit
transform origin top" that
would really mean "top center."
Okay, so that is a quick
overview of CSS transforms.
Now let's move on to CSS transitions.
I said in the beginning that a transition
is really a kind of simple animation.
You specify the beginning
state and the end state,
and WebKit,
the engine that powers Safari,
is taking care of rendering
all of the frames in between.
So you go from one state to another by
changing those values through JavaScript.
So that's when your animation
is going to execute.
So let's take a look at an example.
So let's pretend that this slide
is also a web browser view,
and I have this picture
in the bottom left corner.
So the CSS that I would define for that
picture might look something like this.
So for the WebKit transform value,
my rotation and scale
are 0 and 1 respectively.
Those are the default values,
but I'm just writing them out here
for the purposes of this example.
And I've translated in the
X direction by 20 pixels and in
the Y direction by 300 pixels.
Okay?
So the animation that
I want to happen is,
I want it to kind of flip,
rotate up to the upper right-hand
corner and scale down a little bit,
and land in this upper right-hand
corner of my "slide/browser" window.
So if I were to write, you know,
a CSS declaration that looked
like-- for this end state,
it might look like this.
I rotated by 360 degrees.
I've scaled it down by 50%. And now,
the element has been translated 600
pixels in the X direction and 50 pixels,
let's say, in the Y direction.
So to get from the first
state to the end state,
I'm really just going to change these
values of the style through JavaScript.
So I'm going to, you know,
get my element by its ID,
which is "my_flower," and set
the style of "webkit_transform"
to rotate 360 degrees,
scale by 0.5, which is 50%, and set the
translation to 600 by 50 pixels.
And when I change those
values through JavaScript,
That's when the animation
is going to fire.
So in this example,
the property that I've changed is
the WebKit transform CSS property,
but really many CSS properties
can be animated.
The majority of CSS properties
So things like opacity, color, et cetera,
you can alter all of those
and animate state changes
for all of those properties.
Okay.
So, there are, you know,
we talked about how
you have two keyframes,
and WebKit is taking care of rendering
all of the frames in between your
beginning state and ending state.
Well, there-- even though you can't
modify those keyframes directly,
there is some control that
you have over that curve.
So you can define the way
that curve accelerates using
WebKit transition timing function.
So, there are a bunch of different
curve definitions that you
can specify for this property.
"Ease" is one,
"linear" for uniform acceleration,
"ease in," going slow and speeding up,
"ease out," going fast and slowing down,
"ease in/out," slow/fast/slow.
And you can also specify your own curve
definition using this cubic Bezier
value and supplying X and Y coordinates.
The last piece of control that you
need to know about for CSS transitions
is WebKit - that you can delay
the start of a transition by
specifying a WebKit transition delay.
And this is basically, you know,
maybe a user clicks on a
button or something like that,
and you know that a second has to pass
before you want your animation to start.
Well, you can, you know,
have that kind of control by using
the WebKit transition delay property.
Okay, so that covers CSS transitions.
Let's move on to keyframe animations.
So keyframe animations have all of
the advantages of CSS transitions.
You know, they're easy to define,
simple to execute, et cetera,
plus a few other key features.
First of all, you have fine-grained
control over the keyframes,
so you can, you know,
specify the behavior for the
first half of an animation or
the first 25% of an animation,
et cetera.
You also can control the repeat
count and repeat behavior.
So with transitions,
they happen only once when
you change the values of a
CSS property through JavaScript,
whereas animations,
you can set them to iterate forever,
for instance.
And also,
keyframe animations have DOM events
associated with them so that you can
know when an animation has started,
ended, or iterated.
So we're gonna cover all of these
things by looking at an example.
So CSS animations introduce a new rule,
and that is @WebKitKeyframes.
And this is the way that
you define your animation.
So I'm saying,
"I want an animation to happen "from
WebKit transform in the Y direction,
"-50 pixels," so that's
gonna be off-screen,
"down to 600 pixels," so near
the bottom of the screen.
So that's my definition for my animation.
My animation is named "Fall."
To associate that
animation with an element,
I'm just going to use a
WebKit animation name and then add
the name of my animation right there,
which in this case is "Fall."
I've set the webkit animation
duration to be 10 seconds,
so the animation is
happening over 10 seconds.
I've set the iteration count to infinite,
so this leaf is going to fall forever.
And I've set the timing
function to be linear,
so it's falling with uniform
acceleration throughout the animation.
So,
the interesting part comes when you begin
to define animations over-- you know,
that change over the
course of an animation.
So, before,
our leaf was reaching the bottom of its
path there and just kind of disappearing,
which looked kind of bad.
What we really want is for that
leaf to kind of fade out as it
reaches the end of its path.
So here, I want the opacity to be one for
the first 3/4 of the animation,
and then, for the last 25%, I want
it to fade from 1 to 0.
So here,
I've defined a second animation named
"fade" using the @WebKitKeyframes rule,
and then,
down here in my leaf definition,
I've just chained together those
two animations-- "fall" and
"fade" for WebKit animation name.
I want them both to take 10 seconds,
'cause I want them to
happen concurrently.
I'm going to set the iteration
count to infinite for both of them.
I want them both to happen forever.
And I've set the timing
function for fall to linear,
but I want the fade
animation to kind of ease in.
So when we chain these two
animations together and set
these properties like so,
we get this effect where, you know,
the leaf is falling down
the side of the page,
and then for the last 25% of its path,
it fades in opacity from 1 to 0.
Perfectly clear.
So as I mentioned earlier,
there are animation events
associated with animations,
and these are pretty straightforward.
You can listen for when
an animation starts,
when an animation iterates,
or when an animation ends.
The WebKit animation start,
WebKit animation iteration,
and WebKit animation end.
And you can listen for these
events just like you would
listen for any other event.
Here I'm listening directly on this
element for the animation end event.
A couple more points of need-to-know
information-- your animation
will run if WebKit animation name
specifies a known set of key frames,
so be careful when you're defining
your animation using the rule
that we talked about earlier.
Also, the duration for this animation
has to be greater than zero.
And this is true for transitions,
as well.
You may have noticed there was
a property-- "WebKit transition
duration" on our earlier flower site,
and that was set to two seconds.
The duration for both animations and
transitions has to be greater than zero,
because otherwise,
you're just going from one state
to another with no time in between,
and so you don't have
time to see the animation.
So the duration has to
be greater than zero.
You can also disable animations
with "WebKit animation name = none."
So that was an overview
of CSS visual effects,
a way to add hardware accelerated
graphics and animations
to your web applications.
Now let's talk about
storing data locally.
So there are two aspects to local
storage in iPhone web applications.
The first is the HTML5 SQL API,
and this has been
around since before 2.2.
And this is all about storing structured
data of your application on the fly.
The second part of this feature
is creating an instance of your
site where all the resource files
are cached locally on the device.
so you don't have to load resource
files over the wire anymore.
So let's get started by
talking about the SQL API,
which is part of HTML5.
So here's an application
that I use from time to time.
It's a to-do list app,
and it's a web app,
and it's really great--
I use it all the time.
But when I touch that "+" button
there to add a new to-do list item,
and then I type in the to-do
and I hit "Save," you know,
I've noticed that it can take
anywhere from two to five seconds
after I hit "Save" to the point
where my UI is updated again.
And that's happening because we're
sending that information over
the wire and waiting to get a
response before we update our UI.
A big issue that people face when
creating web applications for
mobile devices is network latency.
So if you were in this morning session,
you're familiar with this slide already.
But network latency is
defined as the time it takes,
the round-trip time that it takes
for a packet to go from your
device to the server and back.
Whereas, bandwidth is defined as
the throughput amount.
So latency on Wi-Fi networks
is pretty low,
It's about 100 milliseconds.
Latency on cellular networks
is just inherently high.
It's about 500 milliseconds.
So, you know,
that tacks on quite a bit of time
to any information that you're,
you know,
sending over the wire and then waiting
for a response to update your UI.
You know,
if you tapped on a menu item in a
native application and the users had to
wait two seconds for that UI to update,
that would be unacceptable.
So,
The application that
I was just talking about,
that to-do list application,
would really benefit from
storing that data locally,
especially when I first enter it.
So this is part of HTML5, as I mentioned.
It's HTML5 database storage.
And this is great because it's
a standards-based approach
to local database storage.
So part of HTML5 in Safari on iPhone
right now and eventually everywhere else
by virtue of being part of a standard.
Secondly, you know,
we're dealing with real-world SQL here.
If you're a big SQL programmer,
you're going to see all of the same
coding conventions and features
that you're used to seeing in SQL.
This API is asynchronous
and callback-based,
meaning that your application is never
going to be kind of locked up waiting
for a database operation to finish.
You begin a transaction,
like a write to the
database for instance,
and then you're free to go execute
other JavaScript in the meantime,
and your code gets a callback when
that write or transaction or whatever
you've executed has finished.
And lastly, origin-based security is
built-in as part of this API,
meaning that your application
can only - or I'm sorry,
your website can only access the
databases that it has created,
and no other websites can
access your databases.
So when I begin talking
about this feature,
lots of people who have web
applications are just like,
oh my gosh,
I cannot live without the cloud.
All of my data has to
be synced to the cloud.
I can't live without the cloud.
I can't have just this
data on this one device.
Well, we're not talking about getting
rid of the cloud altogether.
We're just talking about cutting down
a lot of those network operations.
You could just choose to only
store your data on the device.
But lots of people want to also
store their data in the cloud.
So using this SQL API is going to give
you a way to cut down that number of
network operations and even do those
network operations during idle time,
for instance.
So this is great because it reduces
the complexity of your application.
You know, you don't have to send up
every little piece of data as
it's entered or as it changes,
and then piece it together
on the other side.
And also, you're going to have two
aspects of improved performance.
The first is battery life.
You know, network operations are
expensive on iPhone,
so if your web app is sending
data over the wire frequently,
that's gonna drain the battery
more quickly than normal.
And also, you know,
going back to our to-do
list application example,
your application is going to be,
you know, more responsive if you're not
waiting for a response over
the network to update your UI.
And if this data is stored locally,
you're going to be able to access it even
if your phone is totally off the network.
Okay, so let's get into the
details of this API.
We're going to go through
three main parts of it:
creating a database,
executing transactions,
and handling callbacks.
So the first aspect here,
creating a database.
So if you try to create - I'm sorry,
if you try to open a database
and one does not exist,
then that database will be created.
So the best approach here is to first,
you know,
test for that database functionality
using window.opendatabase.
If the functionality doesn't exist,
you can fall back to some other code.
Here I'm setting up a few parameters.
To do is the name of my
database stored on disk.
I've set a version number to 1.0.
I've set this variable display
name to a string that's going to
be displayed in any UI prompts.
And also I've set an
expected size here in bytes.
And I pass all of these
parameters to open database,
and I'm returned a handle to a new
database if one doesn't exist already.
One important thing to know is
that it's really only the first
parameter that's strictly required.
So if you know that you're opening
a database that already exists,
you can just provide the name
and pass null for the last three
parameters and you'll still
get a handle to your database.
Okay, so once you have a
handle to your database,
you can start doing stuff with it,
and the way to do stuff with that
database is through transactions.
So anyone who isn't familiar
with database programming,
a transaction is really just
an atomic unit of work that
cannot partially succeed.
So when you start thinking
about relational databases and
how that data's integrated,
this is really important.
Like,
you don't want to go halfway through,
you know,
a transaction and have something fail,
and then only half of your tightly
integrated relational data is modified.
That would be bad.
So with transactions,
if something fails along the way,
the entire transaction is
rolled back to the beginning.
So all queries in this HTML5
SQL API have to be part of a transaction.
And a transaction looks like this.
Here I've opened my Todo database
and then I just set a transaction on
that Todo database handle and I am
creating a string of SQL and I'm
passing that string to the execute
SQL function on my transaction.
And that executes the SQL.
As I mentioned earlier,
this API is asynchronous
and callback-based.
So in order to know when things happen,
you have to listen for these callbacks.
So there's two types of callbacks.
The first is a transaction callback,
and this is related to the
entire transaction as a whole.
And the second type of
callback is a query callback,
and those types of callbacks
are related to the individual
queries within the transactions.
So let's talk about
transition callbacks first.
As I said, these are related to
the entire transaction,
and there's two types of callbacks.
There's the completion callback to
detect when a transaction has completed,
and there's also an error callback,
so if there is an error within
your transaction and it's going to
be rolled back to the beginning,
you can know about that as well.
Query callbacks, as I mentioned earlier,
are related to the individual
queries within the transaction,
okay?
So again, there's two types of
callbacks here for queries.
The first is the data callback,
which you can use to manipulate the data
that you've received back from a query.
And the second is an error callback.
So, you know,
we mentioned that all queries
are part of a transaction.
And if a transaction fails in the middle,
it is automatically rolled
back to the beginning.
Well, there's a callback,
a query callback that you can use to say,
well, this query that I've executed
is actually optional.
Please don't let the whole, you know,
transaction fail and roll
back to the beginning.
So you can use this error callback,
error query callback,
to specify that queries within
your transaction are optional.
If you haven't specified an
error callback for a query,
then an error on that query is
assumed fatal and your transaction
is rolled back to the beginning.
So if you want to get started
developing with this feature,
it's actually also implemented
in Safari on the desktop.
And that is really valuable because
there's some great tools available
in Safari on the desktop that
you can use if you're developing.
So here's an example.
It's at webkit.org,
and it's just a set of sticky notes,
and it's storing both the position
of the notes and the contents of the
notes in a database on the back end.
So if I open up the web inspector and
click on this databases tab at the top,
I can actually inspect all of
the data that is being stored
in this particular table,
which is great.
You can inspect your data as you're
developing and make sure that you're
getting the results that you anticipated.
This view is also great because if
you click on the database name or
this little prompt at the bottom,
you get a prompt in the main view.
And from here,
you can execute arbitrary SQL statements.
Again,
a great way to kind of test as you go,
to make sure you're getting
the results that you want.
Also, I love it,
there's tab completion in this view,
so I can just type the letter s
and tab to fill in the word select.
And it speeds me up tremendously.
And that auto completion is
also true for table names,
etc.
Okay, so that covers the SQL API storing
structured data locally.
Now let's talk about a feature.
It's called HTML5 Offline Applications,
and this is new in iPhone OS 2.2,
so the update that just came out.
So your web application has many
resources that kind of come together
to make it a web application.
You know, you have CSS files,
JavaScript files,
you might have some video, HTML, etc.
All of these come together
to make your web app.
Well, there's a way that you can cache
all of those files locally,
and there's really three aspects
that you need to know about
to sort of make this work.
The first aspect of this
feature is the cache manifest.
This is just a text file of
URLs that specify which resources
you want to store locally.
The next thing you need to know
about is the update mechanism.
How do new files get into the
cache and old files are kicked out?
And lastly, what events can you listen
for to know what kind of state
your app or the cache is in?
Okay, so let's take a closer
look at the cache manifest.
So as I mentioned earlier,
this is just a text file,
and it's really just a list of URLs,
and I've saved mine in a file that
I've named "mymanifest.manifest."
And that file would look like this.
So a required value here is you
have to have "cache manifest"
as the first line of this file.
But from there, you know,
comments are any lines that
begin with the pound sign,
and you're really just listing
the URL resources that you
want to store locally on disk.
And they can be absolute
URLs or relative URLs.
So within this cache manifest,
there are two different types
of entries that you can define.
There's explicit entries,
and this is the default, but these say,
"Go to the cache first for this
resource always." And then there's
also a way to specify what's
called an online whitelist,
and you use that with
this network keyword.
And this indicates to the browser
that you want to always fetch
these resources from the network,
never from the cache.
So here I'm creating this
weather application that
I want to function offline.
I always want to get the
forecast dynamically.
I never want to show
a stale forecast here,
so I always want to fetch
that over the network.
So I'm going to use the network
keyword to indicate that.
So once you've defined your manifest,
you add this as an
attribute to the HTML tag.
And that looks something like this.
So I have HTML manifest equals
offline weather dot manifest is
the name of my manifest file.
To make this work,
you actually have to make a
tweak to your server settings
to serve this type of file with
a text/cache manifest MIME type.
So that's easy to do.
On Mac OS X,
you just add a line to this file--
private @c.apache2.mimetypes.
Just add a line to that file
indicating-- in this case,
I would wanna serve all files that
have a manifest extension with
the text/cache manifest mime type.
So now you're using a - you
have a manifest defined,
and when Safari on iPhone goes to,
you know, your application's URL,
your resources are going to be initially
loaded from the cache if they're there
- if they've been previously downloaded.
If your manifest file has changed,
a new manifest file and the
resources within that manifest
file will be fetched as necessary.
So this fetching happens automatically
if your manifest file has changed.
But the part that is manual is
you have to actually swap in
the new version of the cache
files and swap the old files out.
So the time to do this is when
this updateReady event fires.
So here, when onUpdateReady fires,
I'm going to call this
function yourReadyHandler,
which is a function I've defined.
And when that happens,
I'm going to call swapCache
on the application cache.
And as I said,
that kind of swaps out your
old resources and swaps in
the newly downloaded version.
So one event that we mentioned
there was on Update Ready,
but there are a couple other events
that you can listen for as well with
respect to the application cache.
We're not going to go into them in
too much detail here for lack of time,
but you can check for things
like if there was an error,
if the files are currently downloading,
etc.
So that is today's talk on
advanced web technologies.
We talked about, you know,
feeling built-in with
the rest of the system,
feeling like a native built-in app.
We talked about how to define
touch and gesture events through
JavaScript with DOM touch.
We talked about how to position
your content in unique ways and
add hardware accelerated graphics
to your UI with CSS visual effects.
And lastly,
we talked about storing data locally,
so storing structured data in an
SQLite database and also creating a
fully offline version of your web app.
So usually when I give this talk,
at the end of it people are just like,
"Oh my gosh,
I never knew you could do all of this
stuff in a web application before."
And I have to agree that some of
this technology is pretty cool.
So I have been just issuing an
open challenge to the attendees
here of the Tech Talks to really
take these technologies and really,
you know, make something great,
make something that people never expected
could function in a web application.
And then email me about it.
Here is my contact info.
I'm vicki@apple.com.
All of your iPhone web application
resources are basically linked
from developer.apple.com/webapps.
And I've also linked
to the HTML5 spec here,
and also I've added a link
to our CSS visual effects
proposal at webkit.org.